22006 update (#2315)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-06-07-microprofile-graphql-2-22006.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: "MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, improved DB2 query performance, and more in Open Liberty 22.0.0.6"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, improved Db2 query performance, and more in Open Liberty 22.0.0.6"
```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/ryan-storey
author_github: https://github.com/ryan-storey

> seo-title: MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, improved DB2 query performance, and more in Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 - OpenLiberty.io

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-title: MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, improved Db2 query performance, and more in Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 - OpenLiberty.io
```

> seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 offers MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, allowing the use of updated Jakarta components such as CDI 3.0, Jakarta REST 3.0, JSON-B 2.0 and more. An enhancement to JPA 2.1 provides improved DB2 query performance by altering parameter binding behavior. This release also contains a number of significant bug fixes as well as important security vulnerability (CVE) fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 offers MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, allowing the use of updated Jakarta components such as CDI 3.0, Jakarta REST 3.0, JSON-B 2.0 and more. An enhancement to JPA 2.1 provides improved Db2 query performance by altering parameter binding behavior. This release also contains a number of significant bug fixes as well as important security vulnerability (CVE) fixes.
```

> blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 offers MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, allowing the use of updated Jakarta components such as CDI 3.0, Jakarta REST 3.0, JSON-B 2.0 and more. An enhancement to JPA 2.1 provides improved DB2 query performance by altering parameter binding behavior. This release also contains a number of significant bug fixes as well as important security vulnerability (CVE) fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 offers MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, allowing the use of updated Jakarta components such as CDI 3.0, Jakarta REST 3.0, JSON-B 2.0 and more. An enhancement to JPA 2.1 provides improved Db2 query performance by altering parameter binding behavior. This release also contains a number of significant bug fixes as well as important security vulnerability (CVE) fixes.
```

open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---

> = MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, improved DB2 query performance, and more in Open Liberty 22.0.0.6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, improved Db2 query performance, and more in Open Liberty 22.0.0.6
```

Ryan Storey <https://github.com/ryan-storey>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 offers MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, allowing the use of updated Jakarta components such as CDI 3.0, Jakarta REST 3.0, JSON-B 2.0 and more. An enhancement to JPA 2.1 provides improved DB2 query performance by altering parameter binding behavior. This release also contains a number of significant bug fixes as well as important security vulnerability (CVE) fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 22.0.0.6 offers MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, allowing the use of updated Jakarta components such as CDI 3.0, Jakarta REST 3.0, JSON-B 2.0 and more. An enhancement to JPA 2.1 provides improved Db2 query performance by altering parameter binding behavior. This release also contains a number of significant bug fixes as well as important security vulnerability (CVE) fixes.
```

In link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.6:

* <<graphql, MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0>>

> * <<db2, Improved DB2 Query Performance>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <<db2, Improved Db2 query performance>>
```

</featureManager>
----

[#db2]

> ===  Improved DB2 Query Performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===  Improved Db2 query performance
```

> This new JPA enhancement improves EclipseLink's DB2 and DB2 z/OS support by enabling parameter binding for JPA specification defined functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new JPA enhancement improves EclipseLink's Db2 and Db2 z/OS support by enabling parameter binding for JPA specification-defined functions.
```

> For DB2 and DB2 for z/OS, EclipseLink's JPQL parameter binding is disabled when function expressions (SQRT, ABS, SUBSTR, COALESCE, etc.) exist within a JPQL query. This feature will allow EclipseLink to bind JPQL parameters for function expressions that accept untyped parameter markers on DB2 and DB2 z/OS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Db2 and Db2 for z/OS, EclipseLink's JPQL parameter binding is disabled when function expressions (SQRT, ABS, SUBSTR, COALESCE, etc.) exist within a JPQL query. This update allows EclipseLink to bind JPQL parameters for function expressions that accept untyped parameter markers on Db2 and Db2 z/OS. 
```

> This feature will also allow EclipseLink to enable/disable parameter binding per expression, within a query, rather then for the entirety of the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This update also allows EclipseLink to enable and disable parameter binding per expression within a query, rather than for the entirety of the query.
```

> For DB2 and DB2 for z/OS, EclipseLink does not bind JPQL literal values as SQL parameter values. An EclipseLink specific persistence property currently exists `("shouldBindLiterals=true")` to allow EclipseLink users to bind all literal values as parameter values. For DB2 and DB2 for z/OS, this property is currently ignored by EclipseLink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Db2 and Db2 for z/OS, EclipseLink does not bind JPQL literal values as SQL parameter values. The "shouldBindLiterals=true" EclipseLink-specific persistence property  allows EclipseLink users to bind all literal values as parameter values. However, this property is currently ignored by EclipseLink for Db2 and Db2 for z/OS.
```

> This feature will allow for the usage of the `"shouldBindLiterals=true"` EclipseLink persistence property to bind literals values as parameters on DB2 and DB2 z/OS; assuming it is legal to do so according to the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enhancement allows you to use the `"shouldBindLiterals=true"` EclipseLink persistence property to bind literals values as parameters on Db2 and Db2 z/OS; assuming this binding is legal according to the database.
```

> ==== Enabling the New Functionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Enabling parameter binding
```

> In order to start using the new feature, users need only add the new persistence property `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters` to their `persistence.xml` properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start using the new function, add the new `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters` persistence property to your `persistence.xml` properties:
```

[source, xml]
----
<persistence ... >
    <persistence-unit ... >
        <properties>
            <property name="eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters" value="true"/>
        </properties>
     </persistence-unit>
</persistence>
----

> Alternatively, starting on Liberty 22.0.0.2 releases, users need only add the new `<defaultProperties>` configuration to their `<jpa>` configuration, in server.xml. This will apply the persistence property `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters` to all persistence units within applications running on this server.  For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, in Liberty 22.0.0.2 and later, you can add the new `<defaultProperties>` configuration to the `<jpa>` configuration in your `server.xml` file. This applies the `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters` persistence property  to all persistence units within applications that run on this server.  For example:
```

> Alternatively, starting on Liberty 22.0.0.2 releases, users need only add the new `<defaultProperties>` configuration to their `<jpa>` configuration, in server.xml. This will apply the persistence property `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters` to all persistence units within applications running on this server.  For example:

Reviewer: this is confusing- is the beta update only to add the property in a persistence.xml? It seems to be saying the capability has existed for the server.xml since 22.0.0.2. If the capability is only currently available in the beta, do we need to mention 22.0.0.2?

[source, xml]
----
<server>
    <featureManager>
        <feature>jpa-2.1</feature>
    </featureManager>
    ...
    <jpa>
        <defaultProperties>
            <property name="eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters" value="true"/>
        </defaultProperties>
    </jpa>
</server>
----

> ==== Using the New Functionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Leveraging parameter binding
```

> In the application, the user can take advantage of this feature with JPA JPQL queries and CriteriaBuilder API queries.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the application, you can take advantage of this feature with JPA JPQL queries and CriteriaBuilder API queries.  
```

*Example 1:*

[source, java]
----
    Query query = em.createQuery("SELECT g FROM Guest g WHERE LENGTH(?1) > 2 AND g.lastName = TRIM(?1)");
    query.setParameter(1, "Crusher");
----

> By default, EclipseLink will generate the following SQL prepared statement on DB2 and DB2 z/OS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, EclipseLink generates the following SQL prepared statement on Db2 and Db2 z/OS:
```

[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > 2) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM('Crusher')))
----

> With the new property `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters = "true"`, EclipseLink will generate the following SQL prepared statement on DB2:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new property `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters = "true"`, EclipseLink generates the following SQL prepared statement on Db2:
```

[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > 2) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM(?)))
----
and DB2 z/OS:
[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > 2) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM('Crusher')))
----

[NOTE] 
====

> With the Feature enabled, it appears that nothing has changed for DB2 z/OS. This is because it is illegal on DB2 z/OS to use an untyped parameter marker in this LENGTH or TRIM functions. There are many other functions that it is legal to use parameter markers on DB2 z/OS, but this example was chosen to show there are differences between the platforms and, with the feature enabled, EclipseLink knows what is legal on what platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though the property is enabled, no change is apparent for Db2 z/OS, because  using an untyped parameter marker in the LENGTH or TRIM functions is illegal on Db2 z/OS. However, many other functions exist where it is legal to use parameter markers on Db2 z/OS. This example was chosen to show the differences between the Db2 and Db2 z/OS platforms. When the property is enabled, EclipseLink knows what is legal on what platform.
```

====  

*Example 2:*
[source, java]
----
    Query query = em.createQuery("SELECT g FROM Guest g WHERE LENGTH(?1) > 2 AND g.lastName = TRIM(?1)");
    query.setParameter(1, "Crusher");
----

> By default, EclipseLink will generate the following SQL prepared statement on DB2 and DB2 z/OS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, EclipseLink generates the following SQL prepared statement on Db2 and Db2 z/OS:
```

[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > 2) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM('Crusher')))
----

> With the new property `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters` = `"true"`, EclipseLink will generate the following SQL prepared statement on DB2:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new property `eclipselink.jdbc.allow-partial-bind-parameters` = `"true"`, EclipseLink generates the following SQL prepared statement on Db2:
```

[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > 2) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM(?)))
----

> and DB2 z/OS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and Db2 z/OS:
```

[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > 2) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM('Crusher')))
----

However, with the addition of an existing EclipseLink property
[source, xml]
----
    <property name="eclipselink.target-database-properties" value="shouldBindLiterals=true"/>
----

> EclipseLink will generate the following SQL prepared statement on DB2:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EclipseLink generates the following SQL prepared statement on Db2:
```

[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > ?) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM(?)))
----

> and DB2 z/OS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and Db2 z/OS:
```

[source, sql]
----
    SELECT FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME FROM GUEST WHERE ((LENGTH('Crusher') > ?) AND (LASTNAME = TRIM('Crusher')))
----

> Notice that with the addition of the `shouldBindLiterals` property, the literal value `2` will be bound as a parameter in the SQL string. Without the feature enabled, EclipseLink cannot enable binding for some parts of the query and instead will only enable/disable for the whole query. As we can see in this example, EclipseLink can enable some parameter binding while also respecting what is legal/illegal on DB2 and DB2 z/OS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that with the addition of the `shouldBindLiterals` property, the literal value `2` is bound as a parameter in the SQL string. Without the feature enabled, EclipseLink cannot enable binding for some parts of the query and instead only enables or disables for the whole query. As we can see in this example, EclipseLink can enable some parameter binding while also respecting what is legal or illegal on Db2 and Db2 z/OS.
```
